Add end-to-end encryption as a principle (#535)
bitwarden/contributing-docs: docs/architecture/security/principles/01-servers-are-not-trusted.mdx

Reviewer: And one more general question/suggestion, what would you think about moving this down one step to P02? In my head this could be seen as an extension to `P01 - Locked vault is secure`  if we define that a locked vault is what is sent to the server:

> Clients must ensure that highly sensitive vault data cannot be accessed in plain text once the vault has been locked

Or am I stretching it and it would be better to keep different use-cases separate?

Author: I'm not necessarily against moving, but I put this first because I feel it's the justification for why we exist, we make software that is end-to-end encrypted and we need to be clear about what that means.

# P01 - Servers are not trusted

> Clients do not need to trust Bitwarden server or web infrastructure to be good actors in supplying

Reviewer 2: I do not think this goes far enough. I'm not sure how to word it, but I want to include not just the actual server, but anything that from the client's perspective is the server (i.e include malicious MITMs that *do not have database access).

Author: That's what I was going for with "or web infrastructure," but perhaps being second implies _bitwarden owned_ web infrastructure? that's not the intent and I'm open to changing to clarify.

> Clients do not need to trust Bitwarden server or web infrastructure to be good actors in supplying
> data to keep an account's encrypted content secure. In other words, the special status of providing

Reviewer: suggestion: do you think "in supplying data" might be redundant? Might also be unnecessarily restrictive
```suggestion
Clients do not need to trust Bitwarden server or web infrastructure to be good actors to keep an account's encrypted content secure. In other words, the special status of providing
```

Reviewer 2: Would this include serving a malicious web vault then? Is that a guarntee we want to / can give?

Author: Ideally, it definitely would be able to guarantee web vault code. I don't know if we'd ever achieve that goal, but not knowing how to do it right now doesn't mean it's not inline with a principle we have.

@coroiu I agree that's better both because it removes weird caveats and is clearer in intent :shipit:

> a network sync for client data does not enable a server, or any entity between the server and

Reviewer 2: I don't think this goes far enough. It should also include that the server cannot inject new data that the application presents as being the user's, decrypting successfully.

Author: I'm not sure I agree here, yet. It's less that ideal, but not the same as weakening the security of the content.

For example, would duplication of a single vault item be injecting new data? that feels more like a corruption event than a weakening of security. Of course, there might be scarier attacks like duplicating URIs between items to try and take advantage of autofill behaviors.

Then there's just totally new data that was never in the vault. that seems clearly in scope, but I don't know how to differentiate from the above.

I'd like to add something here, but I don't have the phrasing for it, yet.

Reviewer 2: I agree that: injecting *net new, chosen plaintext* data (through e.g. fake orgs) should be covered here. That should never be possible to happen. Duplicating existing data is not an issue.

I don't know what you mean by:

> Then there's just totally new data that was never in the vault. that seems clearly in scope, but I don't know how to differentiate from the above.

"It should not be possible to inject chosen data into the user's decrypted vault.".

Author: that quote means 

> injecting net new, chosen plaintext data (through e.g. fake orgs) should be covered here

😅 

I'll update to include chosen cleartext data protection

> client, to take any action that would aid in decryption of a user's vault by the server.

Reviewer: question: What do you think about the server being able to capture a protected version of the encryption key? Could that technically be seen as "aiding in decryption" as compared to not having that key at all? E.g. it might be easier to attack the UserKey by guessing the MP than it would be to attack the vault data directly by guessing the UserKey. This would not be possible if you were not in a position to access the UserKey.

On the other hand, you still need to have gotten access to the vault data and if you are able to do that then you most likely get the key while you're at it 🤷‍♂️

Reviewer 2: I don't know what matt intended, but from my perspective, attacks that force a client to use a server-known key, or leak (parts of) the key directly, then that is covered. If all the server gets, is the ability to brute-force the password, using the user's intended KDF settings, then that is not covered.

Author: quite difficult to define what I'm going for, but generally I think @quexten and I agree: there are going to be features that allow you to protect a key in some way. Using those feature is signing up for the protection those feature provide. The server should not be able to decrease that level of protection. Having a password to unlock your vault is weaker than something like a passkey, but if the server could manipulate you into weakening your password key, that weakens the security of the feature and would be an acknowledged vulnerability we would fix.

That doesn't make passwords an anti-feature, it just means there's a feature with less security than another one.

Similarly. If the server were able to force the client to use a known key by any means, that weakens the security provided by the feature that was supposed to protect that user key.

Reviewer: That's a clever way of looking at it! How about:

> Clients do not need to trust Bitwarden’s server or web infrastructure to act as good actors in order to keep an account’s encrypted content secure. The special status of providing a network sync for client data does not grant the server, or any intermediary between the server and client, the ability to reduce the effective security of the protections that guard a user’s vault. If a user chooses a weaker form of vault protection (e.g., a password instead of a passkey), that is an intentional user decision, but the server must not be able to manipulate or coerce a client into reducing security beyond what the user knowingly configures.

Author: I tweaked your suggestion a little to be less password manager centric

This is what we mean when we sometimes refer to "End-to-end encrypted."

## Account key sharing as a feature

> This principle does not mean that clear text data are never shared, but rather that any such

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This principle does not mean that clear text data is never shared, but rather that any such
```

Author: unfortunately data is plural so I think this is already correct

Reviewer 2: Can you double check this? https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/data says that it is an Uncountable singular noun; for American English, the singular verb is preferred:

> [U] 	Uncountable or singular noun: a noun that has no plural.

> [+ sing/pl verb] 	A noun that refers to a group of people acting collectively. When used in the singular it can be followed by either a singular or a plural verb in British English. In American English a singular verb is preferred.

Author: looks like it might be an audience or me being out of date thing. I had grown up learning singular is _datum_, but it looks like dictionaries are switching.

I still find lots of references claiming either is true, but I'm happy capitulating here and contributing to English as a living language!

> exposure is always declared to the user and exclusively between accounts, never to the server or

Reviewer: suggestion: consider using the existing phrase "Informed and explicit consent" instead of "declared to the user"

Author: Nice. See ec84aafd922ba937f0d96613815255ed027eedbe

> infrastructure.

Reviewer: suggestion: infrastructure is a bit vague here and has not been defined earlier in the text, I think we can just remove it

Author: If we do, I think we need a term to mean anything not the local client. We discuss this a bit above that the goal isn't to not trust the server repo code, but anything the client communicates to while pulling cloud-stored data.

I'm not yet sure how to say that, but it feels like a sticking point we need to handle. Maybe something as simple as cloud or web infrastructure?

Reviewer: I suggested adding `Clients do not need to trust Bitwarden’s server or infrastructure` further up which I think would resolve this comment. I mostly reacted to `infrastructure` being mentioned for the first time in the middle of the text

## Exceptions

On occasion, product features require breaking this principle in a controlled manner. These
exceptions are always a last resort, tightly limited scope, and we are always looking for
improvements to remove them. All exceptions are outlined here.

### Key Connector

> Key connector is a self-host test only feature that allows an Organization to log in and unlock with

Reviewer: question: what do you mean by "test only"? Isn't this an officially supported production feature?

Author: I have no idea... I can only think I meant to write "self-host_ed_" only and got some auto correct or something. Removed 9d2fc0c09e

> Key connector is a self-host test only feature that allows an Organization to log in and unlock with
> SSO and no password input. This feature is specifically limited to self-hosted instances due to

Reviewer: nit: mini adjustments
```suggestion
Key connector is a self-host test only feature that allows an organization user to log in and unlock with
SSO and no password input. This feature is specifically limited to self-hosted instances due to
```

breaking this principle. It is possible for a Bitwarden server to create an authentication token,
contact the Key Connector server, and retrieve key material that will allow decryption of a user's
vault. For these reasons we encourage strict isolation of key connector servers to private networks

> and only to be used by advanced self-hosted users.

Reviewer: question/suggestion: should we consider a more structured approach to this list? Something like:

```
### Key connector
Key connector is a self-host test only feature that allows an Organization to log in and unlock with
SSO and no password input. We encourage strict isolation of key connector servers to private networks and only to be used by advanced self-hosted users.

#### Scope
This feature is limited to self-hosted instances and requires the administrator to set-up additional services and explicitly enable the feature.

#### Risk
Bitwarden servers can create an authentication token, contact the Key Connector server, and retrieve key material that will allow decryption of a user's vault.
```

Author: It was brought up outside of github to think about moving these exceptions somewhere else to allow them room to grow into a more defined format. I think I like that, but hesitated to do it here.

I'm not opposed to trying a bit of structure, but I think the top blurb would always be duplicated by the sections here because I don't want to bury the lede of scope and risk

### Icons service

The Bitwarden icons service enables the retrieval of site favicons to decorate vault items in the

> Bitwarden clients. To enable this functionality, clients do send clear text domain name information

Reviewer: suggestion: "enable" might be confused with "activating the feature"
```suggestion
Bitwarden clients. To implement this functionality, clients need to send clear text domain name information
```

to the Bitwarden icons service. These URIs are normally encrypted in a vault, but we do this to
aggregate access to the requested domain, speed up loading of vaults, and ensure favicons accurately

> represent the associated URI. This feature is easily disabled in client settings.

Reviewer: suggestion: The "Exceptions" section mentions "tightly limited scope" but the "Icons service" does not explicitly say how the icon service is limited. It might be implicitly understood that this is only used for icons, but I think we should write that out!

Author: See 80334b5430b

# P01 - Servers are zero knowledge

There is no possibility for an attacker or Bitwarden employee to access your unencrypted data by
compromising Bitwarden's infrastructure. Bitwarden has no ability to decrypt or add to your data.
Your key, which Bitwarden cannot access, is the only thing that can be used to decrypt your data or
create new encrypted data.

More precisely, the special status of providing a network sync for client data does not grant the
server, or any intermediary between the server and client, the ability to reduce the effective
security of the protections that guard a user's data. If a user chooses a weaker form of protection
(e.g., a password instead of a passkey), that is an intentional user decision, but the server must
not be able to manipulate or coerce a client into reducing security beyond what the user knowingly
configures. Additionally. the server and any necessary infrastructure cannot masquerade chosen clear
text data as belonging in the set of a users encrypted data. The total sum of a user's encrypted
data is fully isolated from the server and infrastructure. It cannot be read nor expanded outside of
the user's client context.

> This is what we mean when we sometimes refer to "End-to-end encrypted" or "Zero Knowledge."

Author: TIL. It looks like this is a difference between American and British editing convention (https://style.mla.org/the-placement-of-a-comma-or-period-after-a-quotation/)

### Key Connector

Key connector is a self-host only feature that allows an organization user to log in and unlock with
SSO and no password input. This feature is specifically limited to self-hosted instances due to this
principle. It is possible for a Bitwarden server to create an authentication token, contact the Key
Connector server, and retrieve key material that will allow decryption of a user's vault. For these
reasons we encourage strict isolation of key connector servers to private networks and only to be
used by advanced self-hosted users.

### Icons service

The Bitwarden icons service provides site favicons to decorate vault items in the Bitwarden clients.

> To enable this functionality, clients need to send clear text domain name information to the
> Bitwarden icons service. Communicated information is limited to vault item URIs matching some simple

Reviewer: suggestion(non-blocking): no need to repeat the name
```suggestion
To enable this functionality, clients need to send clear text domain name information to the
service. Communicated information is limited to vault item URIs matching some simple
```

> structural requirement. These URIs are encrypted in a vault, but we do this to aggregate access to

Reviewer: suggestion: clarify or remove "some simple structural requirement", sounds a bit vague in a place where we need to be precise to make us sound confident and trustworthy

> Bitwarden icons service. Communicated information is limited to vault item URIs matching some simple
> structural requirement. These URIs are encrypted in a vault, but we do this to aggregate access to

Reviewer: suggestion: use previously established terminology
```suggestion
Bitwarden icons service. Communicated information is limited to vault item URIs matching some simple
structural requirement. These URIs are part of an account's encrypted content, but we do this to aggregate access to
```
